From the New York Times, I'm Natalie
Kitroof. This is the daily.
[Music]
For the past two weeks, President Trump
has been trying and failing to get his
base to stop talking about Jeffrey
Epstein. Today, my colleagues David
Enrich and Shawn McCree explain why MAGA
won't let go of this scandal, how the
president misread his own base, and what
all this shows about the limits of
Trump's power.
[Music]
It's Monday, July 21st.
David, we're in the middle of a crisis
that the White House has so far been
unable to control, which is this growing
anger over the administration's refusal
to release the complete files in the
Jeffrey Epstein investigation. You're an
investigative editor at the Times and
you've been involved in some of the
biggest investigations that the Times
has done surrounding Epstein. So, we've
come to you to understand why won't this
go away?
This won't go away because it involves a
collection of some of the world's
richest and most powerful people and
institutions and a whole slew of
unanswered questions. So to just step
back for a sec, let's just start with
the story that most of us know about
Jeffrey Epstein.
He was a self-styled finance year living
in New York and in Florida and on a
private island. He was associated with
some really rich and famous people, most
notably for our purposes, probably
Donald Trump, with whom he spent a lot
of time in the '9s and early 2000s
hanging out, uh, flying on planes
together, and Trump at times remarked on
their shared interest in women. And the
other really important thing about
Epstein is that in 2008 he pleaded
guilty to sex crimes down in Florida,
spent a brief period in jail, and then
in 2019 he was arrested on federal sex
trafficking charges. And about a month
after his arrest, he was found hanging
in his jail cell in Manhattan.
And since then, there has just been a
neverending flood of conspiracy theories
about what else remains out there about
Jeffrey Epstein. And it is really easy
to dismiss conspiracy theories as
baseless and not warranting further
inquiry. And I think a lot of times
that's true. And in this case, I don't
think it's true. I think there are a
tremendous number of unanswered
questions that involve the finances and
reputations of really powerful wealthy
people and that is really the root of
this. There's so many things that we do
not know.
>> Okay, that's why we're here. We want to
get into those unanswered questions. Be
our guide. Where should we start?
Well, I think the place to start is in
Florida in the mid 2000s when Jeffrey
Epstein first attracts the notice of
state and federal authorities who begin
investigating allegations that he
sexually abused young women and girls.
And this investigation went on for a
while and instead of charging him on
that, they charged him on these two kind
of watered down prostitution charges and
agreed to a plea deal that would result
in Epstein serving very little time in a
minimum security jail with a very
lenient work release program.
>> And did this raise questions at the
time? because the obvious one is why
were prosecutors using such a light
touch with this guy?
>> It did not really raise very many
questions at the time. Certainly the
people in Epstein's orbit uh who he was
friends with and who were providing him
with money and resources and prestige
looked the other way and it really did
not come back into the public view until
journalists at the Miami Herald started
digging into this and trying to figure
out what exactly had happened. and they
produced a series of stories in 2018 and
what they learned was that local
authorities, police and prosecutors in
Palm Beach County had amassed a really
large pile of very serious allegations
about sex crimes that Epstein had
repeatedly committed and that those as
part of this federal plea deal that
Epstein later struck had essentially
been swept under the rug
>> with the direct result being that not
only did Epstein get a really light jail
sentence, but also that the result of
that was that tons of evidence never saw
the light of day and the public remained
really in the dark, therefore about the
extent of Epstein's alleged wrongdoing.
So, I think that the story begins there
because it remains a mystery today why
exactly the federal government
intervened in a way that ended up
basically protecting Epstein and keeping
a lot of the allegations that
authorities had been investigating,
keeping them secret from victims and
from the public at large.
>> Okay, so that's one of these unanswered
questions. How is Epste able to get this
sweetheart plea deal? What are the other
holes in this case?
>> I mean, to me, the biggest outstanding
mystery surrounding Jeffrey Epstein is
how he got so much money. Every time you
read about Epstein and the media in a
context other than his crimes was this
is a guy who was living a life of
absolute luxury. He had properties all
over the place. He owned an island. He
had a private jet. He was certainly very
wealthy. and he certainly had gained the
confidence of some very rich and
powerful men, but he liked to style
himself as a hedge fund manager or a
financeier. And that's just not true.
>> This was not a guy who by any accounts
was a real financial genius or whiz or
had risen to the top of Wall Street.
This was someone who had a very kind of
shallow short track record. So, how did
Jeffrey Epstein amass this enormous
fortune? And there are a bunch of
different conflicting overlapping
unsatisfying answers.
>> So even though some of us may remember
or think of Epstein as this wealthy as
you said financier like this guy is not
actually in reality to the Wall Street
type seen as you know an expert that you
would entrust all your money to.
>> No absolutely not. And my New York Times
colleague Matt Goldstein has just done
an enormous amount of digging on this
topic. Probably the place to start is
with a guy named Leon Black who ran the
giant private equity firm Apollo. And
Black, one of the richest, most powerful
people in the world, certainly on Wall
Street, has the ability to access anyone
in the world that he wants to help get
advice on how to deal with taxes, how to
plan for his estate, things like that.
Who does he turn to? Jeffrey Epstein.
Black paid Epstein something like $170
million over the years for tax and
estate planning services. And it's
important to note that Black has denied
any involvement in Epstein's crimes. But
the extent of the financial relationship
between these two has left a lot of
people feeling suspicious. And Black is
by no means alone here. There were a lot
of people in Epstein's orbit
professionally, personally, and we do
not know the full extent of what was
going on there. There's been a
tremendous amount of speculation and
reporting into questions as to like did
he have something on them? Was there
something else going on here? And we
don't know is the bottom line.
>> And just a quick gut check here, how
normal is that? Do we generally know
exactly how the mega rich are paying
their financial consultants or what
they're using them for?
>> No, unfortunately we don't. But this is
still I think this is a kind of abnormal
situation in part because very few rich
and powerful people are publicly accused
of and convicted of sex crimes and then
die by hanging themselves in a prison
cell. And so Jeffrey Epstein and his
relationships and his money are getting
a lot more scrutiny than a normal
wealthy Wall Street person's life would
be. And I think that if you had hordes
of journalists spending years digging
into the affairs of most people on Wall
Street, my hunch is that it would be a
lot easier to ascertain the truth than
it is proven in the case of Epstein.
>> Okay. So you've mentioned his hanging. I
I want to talk about Epstein's death.
Actually, like this is the thing that
we've heard the most about in terms of
questions, in terms of people really not
believing that this was a suicide.
What's the story here?
>> Well, to recap what happened, Epstein
was arrested in July 2019 and he was
sent to the Metropolitan Correctional
Facility in Manhattan. And he about a
week or two after he had been arrested
and housed there, he tore up some bed
sheets, used it as a noose, and hung
himself. And he was found unconscious,
but alive. And from that point forward,
he was put on suicide watch. He was
supposed to have another inmate in his
cell with him at all times. There were
supposed to be guards checking on him
basically at all times. And instead, one
night in August, he was left in a cell
by himself. and the guards decided not
to check on him for some reason. And he
was found the following morning hanging
from a bed sheet. And this time he was
dead.
>> And this obviously set off even more
conspiracy theories and led to even more
questions about how on earth this
possibly could have happened.
>> Right. The idea is this guy is the
keeper of so many powerful people's
secrets and he ends up dead in a jail
cell where they were supposed to be
watching him.
>> That's exactly right. And what's more is
that, you know, on top of all of that,
there is no video footage that actually
gives us insight into what was going on
in that cell or even in the immediate
area surrounding it.
>> Just to be clear, I understand there are
gaps in the evidence, but what we do
know does confirm that Epstein died by
suicide.
>> Yes, that is the clear consensus among
people who have studied the evidence and
know what they're talking about. And by
the way, the reason that we know a lot
of those details is because the New York
Times spent years and ultimately went to
court to get these records from the
Department of Corrections. We won the
lawsuit. The records were revealed and
we therefore learned a lot about the
circumstances of his death that night in
the Manhattan jail, but there was still
a ton of unanswered questions.
Obviously,
we know though that jails can be very
chaotic places, violent places, places
that are often mismanaged. And I mean, I
sort of wonder how much of this you
could just chalk up to that. I mean,
just standard typical mismanagement,
failures at a jail.
>> Yeah. I mean, that's a very valid
question to be asking. And there might
not have been something nefarious that
happened here. And I I think that
applies to a whole broad range of what
we've been talking about here with
Epstein and these unanswered questions
about him because the government dating
back to when he was first had this
sweetheart deal down in Florida in the
mid200s. The government has been
fighting tooth and nail to keep
information about Epstein secret. And
obviously Epstein and many of his
associates have been doing the same.
And so the reality is there might be
innocent logical explanations to a lot
of this stuff. We just don't know. And
it remains unclear to me when if ever we
are going to get the materials and the
evidence we need to be able to fully and
satisfactorily answer those questions.
And in the meantime, the conspiracy
theories will continue to fester.
David, thank you so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> After the break, my colleague Shawn
McCree explains why these festering
conspiracy theories have taken such a
hold of MAGA.
We'll be right back.
Sean, we just spoke with our colleague
David Enrich about why this Epstein
story has been so resonant for so many
years. And now we want to talk about the
moment that we're in today as the
suspicions around the Epstein case are
crashing around Trump in what seems like
a pretty unprecedented way. And we
wanted to turn to you to talk about that
because you've spent years getting
inside the MAGA movement. Help us
understand the reaction within the base
to this moment. Yeah, I have to say this
is one of the most fascinating things we
have seen in the 10 years that Donald
Trump has been on the scene and forging
this connection with his base. I think
he is having this breakdown with the
people who are most loyal to him and we
don't know where it's going to go. There
are signs that Trump has started perhaps
to turn the page. It's still too soon to
say. And yet, no matter what, this has
been a fascinating, rich case study in
how Trump connects with his base, what
some of his political vulnerabilities
are, the playbook he runs to anytime
he's in trouble, and the White House's
misunderstanding and mishandling of a
five alarm fire with their own base.
>> Okay, let's talk about the mishandling
of the five alarm fire. Walk us through
how that happened. This cycle really
began when the Department of Justice put
out this two-page memo essentially
closing the Epstein investigation
telling everybody, "Yeah, not much to
see here. Time to move on." And how many
of you raise your hand? Think this is a
big deal, the Epstein thing. Would you
raise your hand? So, I mean, every hand
has gone up. And so, you know, people
are saying it's a big deal, Steve.
>> Very soon, you started seeing a chorus
of angry voices. And there were not the
usual suspects here. You saw people like
Charlie Kirk. We want answers at some
point.
>> Yeah. Answer the questions. That's it.
>> Megan Kelly.
>> It's about transparency. One of the main
reasons that we voted Trump in was
because we wanted real answers on real
stories and we didn't want to be BSD
anymore with a bunch.
>> The fact that the US government, the one
that I voted for, refused. You saw
Tucker Carlson
>> to take my question seriously and
instead said, "Case closed. Shut up,
conspiracy theorist." Was too much for
me. Suddenly they were all sort of
singing the same song and it was not the
song that the White House was singing
and then Trump starts making it worse.
>> Posting online this morning he writes,
"My past supporters have bought into
this." He used the word
hookline and sinker. He goes on to say,
"Let these weaklings continue forward
and do the Democrats work."
>> He finally decides to weigh in. And when
he does so, he he does it in this
dismissive, condescending, high-handed
way.
>> It's all been a big hoax. It's
perpetrated by the Democrats. and some
stupid Republicans and foolish
Republicans fall into the net
>> and anybody who cares about this, you
know, is wasting their time.
>> Total disaster the way Trump handled all
this
>> comments like those just made everything
worse.
>> I feel really betrayed and I feel really
really angry.
>> The young men and the Gen Z audience
that I represent, they are flaming mad
right now about this stuff.
>> We are in fact not stupid. I really
think that nothing should commit us
further to wanting to unpack the Epstein
story than the amount of gaslighting
that is currently taking place.
>> These people who normally are just so in
lock step with everything and they can
find ways to twist themselves always to
deflect blame from Trump. This was kind
of one of the first times where a lot of
them looked past any sort of fall guy
and said, "No, no, no. He's being really
weird about this. Why is he doing this?
His answers are shocking me. And that
felt different.
>> What do you think that's about, Sean?
Like, why is this the thing that's
making them for the first time, maybe
ever, start to really question this guy
that has seemed so invulnerable with
this core group for so long? Trump's
inexplicable behavior around this
subject shatters an entire worldview
that if you are a hardcore MAGA person
and you've been marinating in these
concepts and these storylines for a
decade now, the way he's behaving around
this conspiracy and this case and this
subject, it just does not comport with
the shared reality that you've lived in
with other Trump supporters. And I think
to understand that, you have to go way
back to the beginning of Donald Trump as
a political phenomenon.
He springs to power at this time of just
total distrust, cynicism, and even
nihilism in the country following two
failed wars, one of which was premised
on false intelligence. A financial
crisis in which all the rich people who
perpetrated it paid no price and normal
people got screwed over. And Trump comes
along and he says, "Everything you think
is happening behind the curtain is
happening. Trust me, I know. I've seen
it. I know how politicians are. the
people that have sold this country down
the river, they play by a different set
of rules. They never get in trouble. I
am a trutht teller. I'm going to rip the
face off of this thing and you can trust
me, so come along for the ride. And
every bad thing that happens to Trump
following that point only reinforces the
narrative. So every investigation
against him, every scandal,
every attempt by the Washington insider
class to throttle him, it all fits into
the worldview that the establishment is
out to get him because he's telling
these difficult truths about what's
really happening. This is the mind frame
inside the MAGA movement. and the
Epstein case, which is murky and shadowy
and sort of all-encompassing and still
there are major unanswered questions
there, legitimate questions, but it just
fits into these themes so well because
it's about, you know, at its core, rich
people getting away with horrible
things. And that just slots so well into
the worldview that he's seated,
>> right? It's like you're saying this is
actually the exact thing that Trump
promised to reveal to the public to
fight against like in an us versus them.
The US was the people and the them was
elites like Epstein, right? And the
people he surrounded himself with. And
in this case, it sounds like Trump is
making it seem like he's siding with the
elites.
>> Yeah, it does seem like that. And so
there's a little bit of suspicion
creeping in now where for the first time
if you are not poised to defend his
every word and deed and you actually
stop and look at some of it as some of
his supporters are now doing for the
first time ever things start to fall
apart and it's a worldview that falls
apart.
>> Is this just MAGA influencers or do you
sense that the frustration runs deeper
and more broadly than that?
>> That's a great question. It's something
we think about all the time as
Washington reporters, right? Like, do
these storylines that we're fixating on
actually resonate? And I would say this
one absolutely does. This is a real
thing out there in the country. You
know, I'm from a lower middle class town
in Pennsylvania and I've got Trump
voting friends who, one of them reached
out to me the other day and was like,
"We are so disgusted with this Epstein
thing. We don't understand why he's
being like this." And I've got sources
who are Mara Lago members that are
diehard Donald Trump supporters, rich
people who I'm asking, "What do you
think of all this?" And they're sort of
just saying, "Yeah, it's really
unfortunate. It's strange. Like, we need
more answers." And so it's everybody
from the Mara Lago Club members to, you
know, my welder buddies in Pennsylvania.
>> It's kind of fascinating to me that
you're saying a lot of this is like an
own goal by Trump. You know, this comes
from his own mistakes in addressing his
base. That's something he's normally so
good at, reading his base, telling them
exactly what they want to hear. Why do
you think he misread the situation this
time?
>> Yes. Yes. Yes. Yes. That's what makes
this so fascinating. He's so in touch
with that base. I traveled around the
country. I've been to a million Trump
rallies. He listens to the roar of the
crowd and goes where it tells him to go.
He knows what they want. And so it's
this interesting moment where Trump is
at the zenith of his political power,
but I think there are many people in the
movement who are starting to wonder, can
he still hear them? Is he still attuned
to the roar that put him in there in the
first place? if he can't hear them and
he doesn't know what they want. It
brings us to this really interesting
moment where, and this is sort of the
oldest tale to tell about Washington,
which is that if you don't watch out,
you end up becoming the thing you
started off scorning. And what does it
mean to a Trump voter if Trump is now
the deep state?
>> And that is the question that this
entire thing has raised. You said at the
start of our conversation that it seems
like Trump may be finally turning the
page on some of this. What makes you
think that?
>> Well, it's unclear yet where that will
go, but something interesting happened a
couple days ago, which is that the Wall
Street Journal published this big story
that described a birthday scrapbook that
had been given to Jeffrey Epstein in
2003. And the journal alleged that Trump
had written a note in the scrapbook and
uh he'd done a drawing of a naked woman
in there. And Trump's note to Epstein,
according to the journal, ended by
saying, "Happy birthday and may every
day be another wonderful secret."
Last night, after that story was
published, Trump slammed the piece in a
Truth Social post, calling it false.
>> Trump denied the story and the White
House tried to kill it. He wrote in
Truth Social that he filed a powerhouse
lawsuit against anyone involved in
publishing the false, malicious,
defamatory, fake news article in the
useless rag that is the Wall Street
Journal.
>> Nonetheless, when the story came out, I
think for a large portion of Trump's
base, the sort of muscle memory kicked
in, which is that the base runs to
defend him. As soon as I read the story,
I said, "This is the dumbest, obviously
fakest thing. I don't believe it.
>> This is a nothing burger. It's an
absolute nothing burger. I laughed when
I saw it.
>> The Murdoch concocted something last
night and thought it'd be a kill shot on
President Trump. And lo and behold, it's
the exact opposite.
>> Nothing unites MAGA like fake news.
[Music]
And so here, Trump finally starts to
find his wartime footing. Finally, he
had kind of a weapon and he knew how to
use it. And the weapon was what he
claimed was this fake story. and look at
me and look, they're coming after me and
it's a hoax and you can't trust them and
I'm going to sue Rupert Murdoch. And so
now he's on the attack and he's always
good when he's on the attack, right?
>> Will this work though? I mean, these are
people who have really seem to have a
very real and and frankly understandable
desire for more clarity and transparency
around the Epstein investigation. Do you
think they're just going to suddenly
abandon that in in favor of lining up
behind Trump? It seems hard to believe.
I think one of the things that they were
disgusted about was Trump's tone when
talking about this sort of just this
boring story and you know only idiots
would care about this. This is what was
really insensing them as well. And that
goes to the reality that they care
really deeply about this because it's a
really awful story that should be cared
about. And so I just don't see how you
can drop that. I mean it's
you know we keep using words like
conspiracies and and we are talking
about some conspiracy theories here but
they are connected to very real crimes
and there's a reason why this case
gripped the public imagination. It it
was much bigger than politics. I mean
everybody knows about this and follows
this
>> and yet I feel that the theme of Trump's
political moment is that he kind of
always comes back. I mean, it's also
hard to see this being the thing that
leads to like a break long term.
>> It's true. He always finds a way to keep
his people on side. He's also a master
at creating his own reality to suit his
needs. And it's always been true of
Trump that he's most wy when he's in a
foxhole. And he's certainly in one now.
And yet, it's also true that this is not
quite over. There are some big looming
questions that we don't know the answers
to yet.
Will the Trump administration ever
really be able to give enough
information to satisfy its base about
the Epstein saga? Is it ever going to be
enough? And what's going to happen now
with this lawsuit that he's waging
against Rupert Murdoch? And will the
White House be able to turn the page and
get the message onto the next story they
want it to be? It could take some time
before we learn how it's all going to
play out.
>> Sean, thanks so much.
>> Thanks for having me.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
here's what else you need to know today.
A former Jeffrey Epstein employee told
Times reporters that she spoke with the
FBI in 1996 and again in 2006 about a
troubling encounter with Trump in
Epstein's office where she said Trump
hovered over her and stared at her bare
legs, making her feel scared. She was in
her mid20s at the time. The White House
contested the account, saying Trump was
never in Epstein's office. The story
shows how the investigative files on
Epstein could contain embarrassing
material for Trump, even if it's largely
unrelated to Epstein's crimes and was
never fully investigated or
corroborated.
And Israeli forces killed more than 60
Palestinians on Sunday in northern Gaza
after crowds gathered near a crossing
from Israel to try to seize aid from
United Nations trucks. According to the
Gaza Health Ministry and Health Workers,
the Israeli military disputed the number
of fatalities, but didn't offer an
alternative number and said soldiers had
opened fire to remove an immediate
threat, but didn't specify what that
threat was.
It was the latest violence connected to
a new food distribution system that was
introduced by Israel nearly 2 months
ago.
The UN said last week that more than 670
Palestinians had been killed in attacks
near sites built under the new system.
Today's episode was produced by Rob
Zipco and Caitlyn O'Keefe with help from
Mary Wilson. It was edited by Devon
Taylor, contains original music by Dan
Pal, Rowan Nemoto, Diane Wong, and
Marian Lozano, and was engineered by
Alyssa Moxley. Our theme music is by Jim
Brunberg and Ben Lansberg of Wonderly.
[Music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Natalie
Kitrowf. See you tomorrow.
[Music]